Shri Krishna resides in our Vishuddhi Chakra.
In the centre, He resides as Shri Krishna.
On the left hand side, His power, Vishnumaya,
His sister, resides.
There He resides as Gopala, as the one who
lived in Gokul, played as a child.
On the right hand side He resides as the King
who ruled in Dwarika, the King Shri Krishna.
These are the three sides of our Vishuddhi
chakra.
The people who use their right side to dominate
others, use their voice to put down people,
to show their authority, shout at people,
are the people who get affected by the right
side.
When the right side is caught up, on the physical
side, you get a very big problem because the
right heart cannot work out its flow.
So you get what you call asthma and all these
diseases, but specially when the right heart
is affected by the father’s problem.
On the left side is the Vishnumaya, is the
sisterly relationship.
When the sister, who is your pure relation,
is not treated as a sister, when the attitude
of a person towards women is of indulgence
and of lust, then he develops the Left Vishuddhi.
When he develops the Left Vishuddhi very strongly,
and if he has a bad Agnya, or if he has eyes
which are roving eyes, then this Left Vishuddhi
causes lot of trouble.
Left Vishuddhi can be also caused by, as you
know, by feeling guilty about things for nothing
at all.
All these problems arise from Vishuddhi.
But Vishuddhi chakra has a speciality.
When the human beings raised their head upward,
from Mother Earth towards the sky – sky
is, ether is Shri Krishna’s nature – when
it raised its head towards the ether, towards
the sky, then this Vishuddhi chakra developed
into a different dimension and people started
developing their ego and superego.
Superego was already developed, but ego developed
in such a way that it started suppressing
the superego.
That’s how you have got conditionings on
one side of the Vishuddhi and ego on the other
side.
When I told you the other day that you give
up your free will, in the sense that when
you raised your head, you did it through your
free will, with your power of growing that
you had as animals.
After that, now you have reached to the human
level and to rise above the human level, now,
[what] you have to do is to seek your complete
freedom and for that, Vishuddhi chakra is
going to help you a lot.
On this Vishuddhi chakra, we have to really
pay full attention.
It is such a complicated chakra.
It has all the vowels of a Devanagari script
emitting out of the sound of the Shakti that
is passing through it, of the Kundalini that
is passing through it.
So all the vowels are heard on these chakras.
These vowels are, as you know, 16 in number.
Without the vowel in the Devanagari, you cannot
write anything.
Vowels are the sustenance, are the power that
supports every consonant.
So it’s very important that our vowels have
to be fully nourished and respected.
The movement of the neck, as you have seen,
in all international life, if you see, everybody
has practically the same.
Even those who cannot hear, those who do not
understand your language, you can nod like
this, can say no like this, everyone understands
this is ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
In some particular area, of course, they have
little different type of nodding.
But too much of nodding of head is not a very
good sign.
I have seen people in the West, if you tell
them something, to show that they have appreciated
it, they’ll go on … (Shri Mataji nods
Her head a few times) for quite some time.
That’s not necessary.
Just have to say, “All right” or “I’ve
understood it“, that’s all.
You have to use your voice instead of nodding
like this all the time.
It’s very bad, very, very bad for the Vishuddhi
chakra.
Or some of them are the other way round.
That whatever it is, they’ll put up their
head like this … and they won’t talk properly,
they will not say a word, they’ll just keep
quiet.
You may go on pinching them, doing anything,
they won’t budge.
This kind of personality is also very much
detrimental to the growth of their evolution.
Apart from that, their Vishuddhi becomes a
very big problem.
Because of Vishuddhi, there are so many problems.
Like angina, you develop because of Vishuddhi.
You develop spondylitis because of Vishuddhi.
Sometimes people lose their voices completely.
Sometimes, they have all the time coughing.
And there are so many physical problems out
of Vishuddhi because, as I said, it’s a
very, very complicated centre, which looks
after your ear, nose, throat, all the sixteen
sub-plexuses are there, which are looked after
by this centre.
But above all, is the centre of discrimination.
The centre of discrimination only comes when
you are free people.
Till you are biased, till you have your own
concepts, you cannot be discreet.
And that’s the one point where, one must
understand that to achieve your complete freedom,
you have to get your Vishuddhi chakra cleared
out.
First and foremost thing is, that we must
speak in a sweet manner.
Speak to someone in a sweet manner, not artificially,
but sweetly.
Speak in a manner that another person likes
it.
‘satyam vadet priyam vadet’ (meaning:
speak the truth, speak that which pleases).
Speak the truth.
Don’t tell the lies.
If you go on telling lies, after some time
even if you tell the truth, it will become
a lie.
But if you are telling the truth, that, even
if you tell a lie, it becomes a truth.
Now, some people think that they can be cunning,
by their talks, they can cheat people, but
actually, they are cheating themselves.
All such people who cheat others by sweet
talks, by artificial talks, or by some manoeuvring,
go to such a horrible state, and in this Kali
Yuga, especially, they are cursed and they
get exposed and people know about them, that
these are the greatest liars ever known.
Now the times are coming when all such people
will be exposed very much more than they have
been ever exposed.
So be careful, not to think that you can cheat.
In Sahaja Yoga, especially, you cannot cheat.
Those who try to cheat sometimes think that,
“We can befool Mother, we can somehow or
other carry on.
If we sit in front of Mother, She won’t
know what we are up to.”
It’s not so.
I may not say, I may use My discretion not
to say.
I may allow you to have a long way.
But be careful, do not come into My illusions.
I’m very elusive, and when I play My illusions,
you will suddenly find yourself in a very
difficult situation, and then you will say
“Mother, why am I in this situation?”
So this is one of the qualities of Shri Krishna.
That He is the one who becomes elusive.
In His elusiveness – not cunning, but elusive
– in His elusiveness, He exposes people
to themselves.
There are so many stories of Shri Krishna
in which He has elusively acted to give greater
joy to some people, to give nice lessons to
some people, and sometimes to punish you.
For us it is important that we are sahaja
yogis.
In this lifetime, we have a chance – our
Kundalini has risen – that we can face ourselves,
that we can correct our chakras, that we know
about ourselves, that we know where is the
problem is.
I have known of people who were caught up
with Left Vishuddhis and have become devilish
by nature, devilish.
They have gone out of Sahaja Yoga, they have
criticised Sahaja Yoga, they have tried to
trouble Me a lot.
So don’t think that, if Vishuddhi is spoiled,
there’s nothing so special about it.
It can be a very dangerous centre.
Of course, Heart, Agnya and Vishuddhi, these
three centres, one has to guard against, because
three of them can allow you, or can force
you, to become one with identification of
evil as your own.
You might just feel that it’s nice to be
evil.
You might just feel that it is a great fun
to be evil, and you might become evil.
So, at the Vishuddhi chakra, one has to be
extremely careful.
Vishuddhi chakra looks after so many things,
specially your skin, your eyes.
Skin is now, I have seen people who have bad
Vishuddhi, can have all kinds of funny troubles
with their skins.
Of course it has to do with your liver, but
skin is, the way it shines, the way it glows,
depends on how you smile, how you look at
the world.
Many people have a habit of smiling for nothing
at all, especially women I have seen, ladies
I have seen, they just smile stupidly.
That’s not proper.
One should not be stupid.
Stupidity is against Shri Krishna’s principle.
Like, you have seen the stupid people, how
they are.
Their tongue is always half way out.
If you have noticed a stupid man, his face
is that, his tongue is always out, mouth half
open and he looks like a dumbfounded fool.
Now in this only the Vishuddhi plays the part.
Another one is the one where you get the Vishuddhi’s
strains.
So such a person has very pursed lips, angry
lips, and he doesn’t talk.
The another one might even get the expression
of an idiot but could be just making a face
like that.
Because, if he’s cunning, he may take a,
I would say, a kind of a rupa (form), a mask
on his face, that he is an idiot and may try
to deceive you.
So nothing is definite about Vishuddhi.
Whatever may be the expression of a person
– a person may look very innocent, because
that’s the thing you can do with your Vishuddhi.
You are free because you have raised your
head, at this point you have achieved this
kind of a special aptitude, that you can deceive
yourself and you can deceive others.
Some people look extremely innocent on the
face.
They may look to be very simple people, but
may turn out to be horrid.
Some people may look to be idiotic but may
be very intelligent.
So it is how you play with your Vishuddhi,
which is responsible, but the main thing what
I’m trying to tell you, that you can manoeuvre
your Vishuddhi.
The way you want to put your expression, the
way you want to make your face, the way you
want to suggest something – all [these]
you can manoeuvre and you can keep your heart
away from it.
In the heart, you may have poison for a person
but outwardly you may say to that person in
a very sweet manner something that the person
might feel impressed.
But in this, all this behaviour, pattern of
behaviour, you are deceiving your Self, not
deceiving the another person, because your
Self is Spirit which knows you very well.
And this will go on and on for all your lives
that have to come.
So there is no need, in any way, to be artificial
in your expression.
There is no need to hide anything in your
expression.
Of course, I mean, if you don’t like someone,
you need not just say, “I don’t like you“.
But, in that case, you have to be not also
so much appreciative of the person that he’s
deluded into your appreciation.
Now, eyes are very important, and eyes, in
a way, are very much looked after by Vishuddhi
because the muscles of the eyes are looked
after by Vishuddhi.
Now the kind of muscles we have, which pull
our eyes, which close our eyelids and all
that, is very much suggestive.
You must notice that there are some people
who come to Me, their eyes go on like this
(flickering), when they close their eyes,
they cannot keep it shut.
There are some people, when they open their
eyes to Me, they just keep the eyes open,
they just cannot close it.
Both are in trouble.
The ones which are just keeping the eyes open
all the time, are the people having supra-conscious
problems.
And those who are flickering their eyes are
having the sub-conscious problem.
Some people have also the habit of keeping
the eyes in an angle all the time, they never
see you straight but in an angle they’ll
see you (laughter).
They think it’s sometimes, it’s very fashionable,
sometimes.
Ladies think it’s a very good way of looking
at people.
And some of them have such eyes that they’ll
go on, you know, looking and pouring their
greedy eyes onto others, or their lusty eyes
onto others.
This is the worst thing you can do to your
eyes because such people easily can become
blind, such people might have trouble of the
eyes, specially reddening of the eyes can
come to such people, very much, very quickly.
So one has to be careful to keep the eyes
very pure, the eyes of an Yogeshwara, who
was Shri Krishna.
He was a witness.
He was on this earth, He played with Radha.
He married five women, they were the Five
Elements.
Sixteen thousand women He married – they
were His sixteen thousand Powers.
But He was Yogeshwara, He was Yogeshwara.
He had no lust in His eyes, in His mind about
them at all.
He was beyond that.
He was Yogeshwara.
That was the testing point of His, that He
had no lust in His eyes about these women
that He had.
Such an Yogeshwara is there.
Of course, I don’t expect you to be Shri
Krishna.
But you have your wife, those who do not have
wife must look forward to a wife.
That, “We’ll get wives and we’ll have
a wife, ” and think of a wife who will be
your own, so that your eyes will not fall
onto every woman who comes across with that
kind of a thing.
I have seen people, even the photographs or
anything they see, it’s surprising!
I mean there’s nothing in a photograph,
what is in a photograph?
But even a photograph can attract their attention.
I mean, I don’t know what can attract their
attention like this but they are so vulnerable
and they have no control over their eyes,
no control.
They become absolutely lost and they have
That shows that they have no powers in them
and they are slaves of their responses.
So the eyes are very, very important.
As Christ has said, “Thou shalt not have
adulterous eyes“.
There should be no adultery.
Some people have a habit of showing anger
with the eyes.
You see, if they have to show anger they’ll
just go on looking like this and show the
anger.
I need, dare not, do that to you but still.
(laughter) And the angry eyes, you see, are
another dangerous things to do, with your
eyes, because then they can become mesmeric.
If you start putting your eyes onto something
and concentrating on it, your eyes might become
mesmeric, means bhoots will start coming out
of your eyes.
First of all, you’ll catch bhoots in your
eyes, they’ll settle down there and then
they will be falling on other people as bhoots.
It’s a very, very dangerous thing, to go
on looking at something continuously with
concentration.
There’s another kind of a stupid thing,
or a bhootish thing maybe, that people ask
you to meditate here (at Agnya), it’s absolutely
wrong.
[Even though] in Gita it is written, still
it is wrong.
Nobody should put attention here.
If they have to put attention, put attention
at the door.
What’s the use of looking at a window?
You can’t get out of it, can you?
If you have to look at anything, be on the
lookout for the door.
And the door is here.
The door of Sahastrara is to be opened out,
so you should not try to concentrate on this
part.
Many people who have concentrated on this
part have become mad.
When they become mad, people say “He’s
a Yogi, but has got unmanitasha” – that
he moves like a madcap.
How can a Yogi be a madcap?
That means he’s united with God, is He mad?
All such mad people are really mad!
They have nothing to do with God, definitely.
But, there are people who believe in such
things – “Oh, he is in love with God,
so he just jumps on the stage and goes into
ecstasy, dances like a madcap.”
How can God be mad?
First position is this, that the sanest personality
is God.
Has to be.
From where do the sanity comes in?
So, this is one thing one has to understand,
that any such practices can lead you to lunacy,
and one should not do it.
Thirdly, the indiscretion that one has, comes
from people who are good hearted, nice people,
but they get carried away by the smiles of
others or by the artificial goodness they
show on their faces.
I’ve known some people, they always have
a face, like this, as if they are all the
time smiling.
(Shri Mataji tries to demonstrate) I mean,
I can’t do that way.
All the time, if you look at somebody like
this, you see, it means as if you are mocking
at the person.
And there are people I have seen who are just
like this every time (a small child laughs),
and then like this!
(Mother laughs).
So, one should not be always in one pose.
Sometimes these muscles can get very weak
and start paining if you take one [pose].
There are some others who always try to show
that they are very miserable.
I don’t know, what do they want to attract?
Attract the attention of others?
Attract the bhoots in themselves or, I don’t
know, what are they up to?
Why can’t they keep a normal face?
Even while sitting in dhyan , or meditation,
I have seen them, trying to show Me, or whatever
it is, because My eyes are mostly closed,
but doesn’t matter.
When I open My eyes, I find some people like
this, like that (looking at Her smiling).
Why?
What is the need?
(laughter)
You have to have a balanced face.
That’s what Shri Krishna has described the
stitha pragnya (the witness state), the one
who is balanced.
Who doesn’t laugh like an idiot.
Who laughs, but not like an idiot!
Nor is a serious [type], like another kind
of an idiot!
So, both the things are not at all expression
of your inner being.
Such a person is, as I told you today, is
not frivolous, but not serious either.
But full of joy within himself.
He doesn’t want you to be unhappy, never
would like that you should be unhappy people.
But human beings, if they want to be unhappy,
what can anybody help, because they have got
the free will to be unhappy.
They have got a free will to cut their nose,
they have a free will to cut their ears, they
have free will to commit suicide.
They have this free will, so-called.
Now, the greatest free will comes from Vishuddhi
chakra, as I told you.
And that’s why we call Him Yogeshwara.
He is the Ishwara of Yoga.
The establishment of yoga is possible when
you surrender yourself to Shri Krishna.
[When you] completely surrender yourself to
Shri Krishna your yoga will be established.
Means what?
Means all your balances will be established.
You go into complete balance, and that balance
is complete because Vishnu, Who is the incarnation
for sustaining the dharma, Who is responsible
for giving you the balance, becomes complete
in the form of Shri Krishna.
That’s why is said that you leave all the
dharmas – “Sarva dharmanam parityaja,
mamekam sharanam vraja”.
That’s why “Surrender all of them to Me”.
So all the dharmas, if you put it at the lotus
feet of Shri Krishna, means, if you follow
His ideals, then all your dharmas are balanced.
But, after realisation, you go beyond dharma.
Whenever you go wrong in dharma – dharma
achyuta, as they call it – when you go wrong
in dharma, that’s the time you have to surrender
yourself to Shri Krishna, so that He establishes
your dharma.
There are so many dharmas.
There is the ‘pati dharm’ – husband’s
dharma, ‘patni dharma’ – wife’s dharma,
father’s dharma, mother’s dharma, son’s
dharmas, then ‘rashta dharma’ means ‘the
nation’s dharma’.
Then you have all kinds of dharmas also, we
can say, where one has to bow to the higher
things of life.
But then He says ‘Sarva dharmanam parityaja’
– ‘Forget all the dharmas’ , ‘mamekam
sharanam vraja’ – ‘Just surrender your
dharmas, all of them to Me’.
That is at Vishuddhi.
At Vishuddhi chakra you surrender all your
other dharmas.
It means that it all gets sublimated.
It all gets complete.
The wholesomeness is achieved because He is
[the] Collective Being, He is the Viraat,
because He is the integrated form of all the
dharmas and He is the Viraata in our brain,
He represents our brain.
And when this Viraata, in us, is awakened
fully, then all the dharmas become natural
with us.
We don’t have to do any dharmas.
We don’t have to be conscious of any dharmas,
but automatically we become dharma ourselves.
For example, there are people, now say Christ
– we can take example of Christ.
He was dharma personified.
He would not steal money from anybody, will
He?
Will He run away with somebody’s wife?
Will He?
Will He do anything wrong?
No, He cannot.
Why?
Because He was dharma.
So, now you have become dharmateet – means,
you have entered into the Kingdom of God.
Into the Viraata’s conditions.
And there, your condition is such, that your
state is such, your state is such, that you
are dharma.
If you try to do Adharma, you’ll suffer.
If you try to do wrong, you’ll suffer.
Here, I don’t have to tell you to be righteous.
I don’t have to tell you, there’s no need.
I don’t have to tell you that you tell the
truth.
I don’t have to tell you don’t steal.
I don’t have to do all these things.
Only thing I can tell you, that get rid of
your ego and superego, that’s all.
In a very general terminology.
But you will follow Christ automatically.
You will follow Krishna automatically – sahaj.
Because now you have gone beyond dharma, you
have crossed the limits of dharma where you
had to follow a dharma.
Now you have become the dharma.
Where you will stand, wherever you will be,
dharma will stand with you.
People will look at you and say, “Here is
a dharma standing.
He is the dharma to be worshipped“.
Not because of anything, but because your
state is that of dharma, [and] you have gone
beyond that.
Supposing this is the loudspeaker I am using
today, to talk to you.
But supposing this loudspeaker becomes part
and parcel of me, I don’t have to use this
(Mother taps microphone), I go beyond it.
In the same way, you are using the dharma
first of all to establish yourself, but when
you go beyond dharma into this state of Viraata,
then you don’t need any dharma.
You become the dharma of Viraat.
Now, what is the dharma of Viraata?
What is the dharma of Shri Krishna?
Is collectivity.
Krishna is the brain.
Shiva is the heart.
And Brahmadeva is the liver.
Now, what’s the faculty of this brain is
that the Tree of Life, of evolution, grows
downward, as He says.
And this tree is growing downwards, of awareness
from the brain.
But, if you have to go to the roots, you have
to ascend.
And that ascent you have achieved, now you
have gone to the roots of your brain, where
all your roots are enlightened, all your nerves
are enlightened, your brain is enlightened,
you are an enlightened person.
When you are in darkness, you may catch hold
of a snake as rope, but when you are in light,
you will drop it.
In the same way, when you become enlightened,
your dharma is in light.
You don’t have to take to any guru or to
any book or to anyone – you know yourself,
in your own light, that this is wrong.
Now the collectivity part of it’s very important.
Anybody who cannot be collective is not yet
a sahaja yogi.
Not yet a sahaja yogi at all.
Collective in the sense that, anybody who
cannot live with other sahaja yogis, who tries
to find faults with someone all the time,
who wants to run away with his wife and stay
somewhere else or with her husband, who wants
to get out, is not a person who is collective.
There’s no need to say that, “I cannot
live under the circumstances in which sahaja
yogis can live.”
If you’re a sahaja yogi, if you are a yogi,
you can live.
Look at Me, I am such an old woman, I can
live anywhere.
You take Me to a village, you take Me to any
place, I’m not bothered about any physical
comforts at all, because I am comfortable
within Myself.
My comforts are within Myself.
In the same way, a person who is not collective
… like many people just come to pujas, that’s
all.
It’s like going to the church only once
in Christmas, and they’ll say, “Christ
doesn’t look after us.”
Of course, we’re not going to church, and
you don’t meet Christ, but I mean to say
that, just to have a casual way of Sahaja
Yoga, you cannot gain.
You have to be collective, and collective
means that at every collective program, you
should be there.
You should always meet collectively, meditate
collectively, live collectively and try to
find ways and methods of being collective.
There are so many evil forces, which are all
the time trying to attack collectivity.
First they will attack the leaders.
That’s the first thing.
Any leader tells somebody, “You shouldn’t
do like this“, immediately that person will
start spreading stories against that leader:
“He’s very bad.
He’s like this, he’s very harsh.
He didn’t garland me, he didn’t give me
this, that…”
How can you garland a bhoot?
Can you?
Then, if that doesn’t work out, then they
have their sly methods of going round, and
talking something here and there in the ears,
to create some sort of a politics.
All such people will be thrown out of Sahaja
Yoga, as there is a centrifugal and a centripetal
force – both acting equal and opposite.
Anybody who goes against collectivity, who
sticks to their bhoots, sticks to their negativity,
will have to get out of Sahaja Yoga.
And that is to be remembered – that to be
collective is to be joyous, is to be progressive,
to be going further.
It was all right when people were meditating
in the Himalayas, it was all right at that
time, they were all alone, meditating all
alone to achieve something for the collective.
But they also did not get their realisation.
When you have got your realisation – remember
this – now you have entered into the Kingdom
of God, into the Kingdom of Viraat, where
you are a part and parcel of a collective
being.
You are not alone.
You cannot be singled out, you cannot separate
yourself.
Now you are awakened in the body of Viraata
and you cannot get out of it.
If you try to get out of it, you cannot be
nourished.
Supposing I take out part of My body, will
it be nourished by this body?
It won’t be!
In the same way, you have now become part
and parcel of that collectivity, and that
collectivity, that Viraat, is going to look
after you, going to nourish you, going to
do everything that is necessary for your spiritual,
physical, mental, emotional, even financial
development.
But, if you cut it short, if you try to block
the collectivity, if you try to make problems
for collectivity or even if you try just to
get out of the collectivity, then that is
not our interest, that is not our work.
This is to be understood, fully, in every
way possible, and this when is understood,
in a proper way you should know that collectivity
is not only your advancement, is not only
your development, is not only your achievements,
is the achievement of the whole humanity.
The purpose of your creation is fulfilled
by that.
Those people who live in the ashram are better
off, always, than the people who live alone.
Always.
They will always have better results than
the people who live alone.
Maybe they live alone because they want to
have a little private life, or a privacy,
but their privacy is not going to help them.
That’s not going to help them at all.
The more you live together, the more you reside
together, the more you enjoy together – there
will be greater chances of your advancement.
The more you will try to make yourself private,
the more you’ll try to get out of it – whatever
explanation you may give – God understands
you very well.
So, all such things where you cut off yourself
from the mainstream, you try to get out of
the mainstream, then there is a big problem
for you.
Of course, for certain conveniences, you may.
For your certain understanding, you may.
But, you should enjoy more the company of
sahaja yogis than your own private company
in the dingy room of yours.
That is one thing you can judge yourself [on]:
do you enjoy the company of sahaja yogis or
you enjoy the company of three, four of your
family people, together in a circus?
The judgement is your own.
Sahaja yogi: “Not difficult Shri Mataji”
Shri Mataji: Nothing is difficult in Sahaja
Yoga.
It is the simplest thing to be a sahaja yogi
and even more simple to be collective.
To be uncollective, you have to do something.
Like I said that, it is very easy not to drink,
I mean drink some wines and things, because
if you don’t want to drink, you are sitting
at home – is all right, don’t have to
do anything.
But supposing you have to drink, then you
have to go to a pub, or you have to go [to]
somebody, open the bottle, get a particular
type of a glass, pour it down, this, that.
In India, for example, where there is prohibition,
you are sitting with a fright.
But for a person who just drinks water, he
doesn’t have to do anything.
So, to do wrong, one has to do something,
but to be good, you don’t have to do much
– is absolutely labour saving, energy saving
person.
(laughing)
You see, to do bad, supposing, you see, I
want to harm somebody, I’ll have to go out
of the way to find out ways, methods.
If I have to tell lies, I have to think of
ten lies to cover that one lie.
But if I tell the truth, finished!
I have told the truth, finished!
With few words, it’s done.
So, to be collective is much more easier.
Of course, not for crooked people, because
crooked people, wherever they move their angularities
trouble others, you see, like poking of thorns.
But those who are flowers, they fit in anywhere,
people like them, they like their fragrance,
they look at them, they enjoy them.
Beautiful things.
Now, see, today they are looking like lotuses.
How is it?
Without doing anything, they have become lotuses.
How?
How they have become like lotuses?
Whether they are lotuses or they are daisies,
God alone knows.
But they have become lotuses – Sahaj.
How?
Because they are one with God.
When we stand in our own way, when we try
to do something privately, then God says,
“All right, go private!” (laughter) But
when we are public, He looks after us.
And then, in Sahaja Yoga, as you know, that
collective growth is the only way we understand
Sahaja Yoga.
Somebody knows something, somebody knows something
else, somebody knows something else.
When we are collective then we really understand
every aspect of Sahaja Yoga.
Supposing there is somebody, a scientist,
somebody’s a musician, somebody is another
thing.
We cannot know everything.
So you know something from this one, something
from that one, something from there.
So all the rivers, as they flow into that
collectivity and you enjoy the ocean of all
these other things.
You don’t have to go to all the rivers in
India – like you go from Ganga, Yamuna,
Saraswati, Kaveri, thousands of miles – go
to the sea, all of them are there! (laughter)
Like that, you have to enjoy the sea, where
everything is.
All kinds of beautiful things are there and
you enjoy that.
I hope this puja – which is a very remarkable
puja … Firstly, so many things are Sahaj.
Firstly, they told me the telephone number
of this place is ‘32 16 32’.
And He’s accompanied by 64 Yoginis – Shri
Krishna, so 32 on this side and 32 on that
side with Him, sitting [in the middle] with
them.
This place is called as ‘Black Lake’.
Krishna is black.
This place they got suddenly, and this is
the only place in this so-called military
regime of Switzerland where people can sleep
on the ground.
You are not supposed to sleep on the ground.
If there’s no cot, you hang in the air but
you cannot touch the ground.
That kind of a stupid military business is
here!
They had to find such a sensible, practical,
such a cheap place for you, is [a] Godsend.
We are here surrounded by beautiful things.
With the cows – so many cows, at the time
when it is Krishna’s birthday.
So many cows, so fond of cows.
And the cows, when their bells move – in
the morning, I heard, in the evening – so
beautiful.
And when they are moving home in the evening,
how the – as they call goraj, is the dust
of their feet – was filling the sky.
Is just Gokul here, I felt.
Today also, there’s one thing more one has
to say, that it’s the 16th Shri Krishna
Puja.
So, in so many ways, this is a very great
puja which you are attending, for which people
have to take thousands and thousand of janmas
(births), do so many punyas, which you have
got so Sahaj, because there must be something
about you people also.
May God Bless you.